Cypria

The Sons of the Achaeans

In the lands West of the Aegean Sea, power is concentrated in the hands of King Agamemnon of Mycenae, a mighty city in the Argolid region. Since almost all the surrounding kings and princes are his subjects and tributaries, the name 'Argive' has come to be employed for many people outside of the Argolid. Others call them by the name 'Danaans', after Danaus, who came from Egypt and settled in the Argolid, and whose descendants came to populate the region. Most of all, however, they are known as the Achaeans.

Achaeus was the son of Xuthus, son of Hellen (after whom the land will in later ages become known as 'Hellas'), son of Deucalion, who, along with his wife Pyrrha, was the only person to survive the Great Flood. Achaeus' father Xuthus used to rule in Thessaly, but was expelled by his brothers and fled to Athens. Yet he was banished from Athens as well, and died as an exile. His son Achaeus was determined to regain power in Thessaly, and gathered troops to attack it, becoming king on his conquest. Achaeus' sons Architeles and Archander came to the Argolid region and married the daughters of Danaus, Automate and Scaea. As a result, the region (and many other lands besides) came to be known also as Achaea, and the Achaeans are in addition called Danaans and Argives.

Though the Argolid is named for its principle city, Argos, one of its near neighbours would ultimately eclipse it: Mycenae. There are many stories about the origin of the name Mycenae; it is said for example that it was named after Mycene, a great beauty and daughter of the river god Inachus, though it is also said that it was named after Myceneus, the grandson of Phoroneus (the first human). Another story has it that the hero Perseus, being thirsty, plucked up a mushroom ('mykes' in Greek) and drank water from it, and so founded a city on the spot called 'Mycenae'. Yet another version is that Perseus named it after the cap on his scabbard (also 'mykes'), which fell off there. For some time the descendants of Perseus ruled Mycenae, but after a war with the Taphians, Perseus' grandson Amphitryon was banished by his uncle Sthenelus for accidentally killing Electryon, his father, and the Pelopides came to power in the city.

The Pelopides were not a happy family (and neither are their descendants, the Atrides!). Pelops was slaughtered by his father Tantalus and served to the gods at a banquet in Maeonia in what seems to have been an especially unwise joke. The gods soon discovered his crime, though not before Demeter had eaten Pelops' shoulder, and restored Pelops to life (giving him a new shoulder of ivory), and punished Tantalus to starve and thirst perpetually in Hades, where he still suffers. Pelops came to that part of Achaea that would bear his name, the Peloponnese (which translates into English as 'Pelops' Island'), and won the hand of Hippodamia, the daughter of King Oenomaus of Pisa (which would later become known as Elis). Oenomaus was famously cruel, and set the same challenge to all of Hippodamia's suitors: they must drive a chariot to the Isthmus, but if Oenomaus could overtake them, he would kill them. All fell to his hand, until Pelops attempted the challenge. He was cunning, and decided to bribe Oenomaus' charioteer Myrtilus, who sabotaged Oenomaus' chariot. Oenomaus' chariot fell apart, and as he died, entangled in the reins and trampled by the horses, he cursed Myrtilus to die by Pelops' hand. Sure enough, Myrtilus tried to rape Pelops' new wife Hippodamia, and when Pelops found out, he threw Myrtilus into the sea between the Peloponnese and Crete (which thus became known as the 'Myrtoan Sea'). As he died, Myrtilus himself cursed Pelops and his family.

Pelops' sons were Atreus, father of Agamemnon and Menelaus (the 'Atrides'), and Thyestes, father of Aegisthus. Atreus took power in Mycenae, but after a terrible family falling-out in which Thyestes raped his own daughter (who killed herself), Aegisthus murdered Atreus and gave the throne to Thyestes. Agamemnon and Menelaus were exiled, but with the help of King Tyndareus of Sparta were restored to power. They married Tyndareus' daughters Clytemnestra and Helen, and while Agamemnon became King of Mycenae, Menelaus became King of Sparta. Menelaus had some stiff competition, however - many other mighty rulers in Achaea came to seek Helen's hand (for she is the most beautiful woman who ever lived) - but they agreed the Oath of Tyndareus, that each man would protect whomever eventually won her hand. As a result, Agamemnon and Menelaus are now the overlords of most of the princes of Achaea.

Then the treacherous Trojan prince Paris came to Sparta and stole away Menelaus' wife Helen. This demanded a declaration of war on him and on his city, Troy, and all the kings and princes who swore the Oath of Tyndareus have rallied around Agamemnon and Menelaus, and are leading their armies to war. Agamemnon commanded that they gather their forces at the Boeotian city of Aulis on the coast of the Straits of Euripus (opposite the island of Euboea), yet clearly he was still affected by Myrtilus' curse, for he was forced to sacrifice his own daughter, Iphigenia, in order to obtain favourable winds to allow the expedition to sail. Yet he did not shrink from this, and he brought the greatest army and the greatest fleet ever assembled across the Aegean Sea to make war on Troy.

However, Myrtilus' curse has not yet been completed, and more tragedy may lie ahead in the near future... 