Cypria

The Trojan Alliance

Long ago, Dardanus, the son of Zeus and the Pleiad Electra, lived on the island of Pelasgis (known in later ages as Samothrace) but had to emigrate because of its poor soil and rough seas. So he crossed the sea and settled in the land of Mysia in North-West Asia Minor. The local king, Teucer (the son of the river god Scamander and the nymph Idaea), received Dardanus warmly and gave him his daughter Batia in marriage. Dardanus established a city in the region, and called it Dardania. Dardanus' son Erichthonius succeeded him as king of the Dardanians, and became the richest man in the world at the time. He married the daughter of the river god Simois, Astyoche, and by her had a son named Tros. Tros' son Ilus founded a great new city, which is known after his father as Troy, though it is sometimes also referred to as Ilium.

The story goes that Ilus went to Phrygia and took part in a series of games held by the local king, in which he won the victory in wrestling. As a prize, the king granted him fifty young men and fifty maidens. As a result of an oracle, the king also gave him a cow, and told him to build a city wherever it should lie down (in the same way that Cadmus founded Thebes). The cow lay down on the hill of Ate, and there Ilus prayed to Zeus to give him a sign. Zeus sent the Palladium (a wooden statue of the goddess Pallas) down from heaven, but since no man may look on the Palladium, Ilus was blinded by it. Later he prayed to Pallas, and he received his sight once more. The Palladium now is the cult statue in the main temple of Troy, in the citadel, and a world-famous statue. It can only be attended by women.

Ilus' wife Eurydice gave birth to Laomedon, an arrogant and slippery man who became King of Troy. Apollo and Poseidon decided to test him, and came in the guise of craftsmen, offering to build him mighty walls. Laomedon agreed, but when they had finished (having built the greatest walls in the world), he refused to pay them. Angered, Apollo sent a plague to the land, and Poseidon sent a sea-monster to snatch away the poor people from the shore. An oracle foretold that these curses would only end if Laomedon sacrificed his daughter Hesione to the monster, which he did, tying her to a rock on the shore. Heracles, who was passing through, offered to save her. In return, he asked Laomedon to give him the divine mares that he had received from Zeus (as compensation for Zeus' rape of Ganymede, Ilus' brother); Laomedon agreed, but when Heracles had saved Hesione and killed the monster, Laomedon would not pay up. So Heracles began the first war against Troy, and brought an Achaean army that conquered the city. Heracles gave the throne of Troy to Laomedon's only surviving son, Priam, telling him to rule more wisely than his father.

Priam is undoubtedly Troy's greatest king so far, wiser than any of the others. But today Troy is engulfed in yet another war with the Achaeans due to his son Paris' indiscretions, and although they do not have Heracles on their side, they have a much bigger army this time. Priam and his wife Hecabe have fifty children, and though some, such as Hector, are noble and wise, others, such as Paris, are less reliable. What was it that brought Paris and Helen together and caused such strife and toil for Trojans and Achaeans?

It is said that Zeus wanted to marry the Nereid Thetis, but after hearing an oracle that said that Thetis' son would be greater than his father, he decided to give her hand in marriage to the mortal Peleus of Phthia. All the gods were invited to the wedding banquet - all except the goddess of Discord, Eris. Yet Eris often manages to sneak in where she is not wanted, and she through a golden apple among the goddesses, saying, "For the fairest." Hera, Athena and Aphrodite began to argue over who was fairest, and so Zeus sent them to Mt Ida to be judged by Paris, who was watching over his flocks there. The goddesses all tried to bribe Paris, and so ultimately it was a question of which he wanted more - wisdom and victory (Athena), dominion over Europe and Asia (Hera) or marriage to Helen, the most beautiful woman in the world (Aphrodite). He chose Aphrodite as the winner, though there was just one problem - Helen was already married to Menelaus. And so Paris came to Sparta, and when Menelaus had to go to Crete on state business, Paris took the opportunity to abduct Helen and bring her to Troy. Hera and Athena, jealous and angry at Paris and the Trojans, stirred up war in the hearts of the Achaeans, who have now led their armies across the Aegean against the Trojans. There are other stories as well; it is said, for example, that the Trojan War simply began because there were too many men, and Zeus wanted to relieve the Earth of their burdensome existence.

Though Troy faces many enemies from the land of Achaea, nonetheless the leader of her armies, the crown prince Hector, is a great man, and Troy can call upon many friends of her own. The other men of the Troad - the Lelegians, the Dardanians, the Cilicians, the Teucrians, the Adrastians and others - have all answered the call of Priam to support Troy in this war. In addition, the Thracians who live in the wild forests and mountains North of the Aegean are allies, as well as the Lycians, great archers from the South, their neighbours the axe-wielding Carians, the Maeonians, and the far-famed Amazons from the banks of the River Thermodon on the edge of the world. Troy's great walls stand firm and imposing, and tens of thousands of Trojan warriors stand ready to answer Prince Hector's call to arms. 